# Linear-Congruential-Generator

## What is it?
A linear congruential generator (LCG) is a simple algorithm which can be used to create pseudorandom numbers within a computer. Such algorithms can be used to utilise randomness in all kinds of software from program to games to anything that requires computers.

The algorithm in essence is defined as followed:

`Seed = (a * Seed + c) mod m`

Each iteration updates the seed, producing the next pseudorandom value.

## What is "Pseudorandom"?
Pseudorandomness refers to numbers generated by deterministic algorithms that appear random. Computers themselves are deterministic, meaning the same inputs always produce the same outputs. Because of this, they cannot create true randomness on their own, but they can produce sequences that look random.

Real-world sources (such as system time or hardware noise) are often used only to choose an unpredictable seed, not to generate the randomness itself.

## Algorithm parts explained

### Multiplier 'a'

The constant `a` can be seen as the multiplier for the algorithm. It controls how strongly the current value influences the next.

### Incrementor 'c'

The constant `c` can be seen as the incrementor which prevents the generator from getting stuck when going through multiple cycles.

### Modulus 'm'

The constant `m` defines the range of values the generator can produce, from `0` to `m − 1`. For example if m was `10` then the generator will randomly pick a number between `0` and `9`.

### The Seed

The seed is the initial value that determines the starting state of the generator. While the algorithm itself is deterministic, using a different seed causes the generator to start at a different point in its sequence, making the output unpredictable to an observer. In my version of the program it uses the system's current unix time to determine the seed for the current run and as explained before, the use of the system time ensures that the generator everytime it is turned on will remain random (though technically pseudorandom). 

If you know the seed of this current run then you will be able to generate the same sequence of numbers of that exact point. For example with the following variables:
`m = 10`
`a = 11`
`c = 3`
`seed = 7`

If you ran the software 3 times it would produce `0`, `3` and then `6`. If you restarted the generator with the same values, the same sequence of numbers will show up in the same order as the value of the seed is the same. Having the seed is useful if you want to reproduce the same order of numbers for testing however in live systems, the seed should change between runs so the output does not appear predictable, even though it is still pseudorandom.

## What determines the values of the Multiplier, Incrementor and Modulus

Technically the values can be any positive value however to ensure that the generator cycles through the maximum possible value, there are 4 rules that the values should follow which are checked within the program (known as the Hull–Dobell conditions).

### m must be positive

If modulus was 0 or negative then the math wouldn't work.

### c must be coprime with m

If `c` shares a factor with `m` some values will become unreachable. For example if `c` was 9 (1, 3, 9) and `m` was 12 (1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12) then they would violate the rule as they both share a factor of 3.

### a - 1 must be divisible by all prime factors of m

This ensures that the multiplier doesn't skip parts of the number space. For example if `a` was 11 and m was 6 (1, 2, 3, 6) then it would violate the rule as all the prime factors of `m` aren't divisible from `a - 1` (10).

### If m is divisible by 4, then a - 1 must also be divisible by 4

If this rule isn't in place then it will simply oscilate between even and odd values. For example if `a` was 10 and `m` was 4 then the rule would be violated.





